--- Page 1 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for
Sustainable Data Center Operations
Hanzhao Wang*1
Jingxuan Wu*2
Yumeng Li3
Yu Pan1
Guanting Chen†2
1
The University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney
2
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
3
Department of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University
*Equal contribution
†Corresponding author
guanting@unc.edu
The growing demand for AI-driven workloads, particularly from Large Language Models (LLMs), has raised
concerns about the significant energy and resource consumption in data centers. This work introduces a
novel LLM-based predictive scheduling system designed to enhance operational efficiency while reducing the
environmental impact of data centers. Our system utilizes an LLM to predict key metrics such as execution
time and energy consumption from source code, and it has the potential to extend to other sustainability-
focused metrics like water usage for cooling and carbon emissions, provided the data center can track such
data. The predictive model is followed by a real-time scheduling algorithm that allocates GPU resources,
aiming to improve sustainability by optimizing both energy consumption and queuing delays. With fast
inference times, the ability to generalize across diverse task types, and minimal data requirements for
training, our approach offers a practical solution for data center scheduling. This framework demonstrates
strong potential for advancing sustainability objectives in AI-driven infrastructure. Through our collaboration
with a data center, we achieved a 32% reduction in energy consumption and a 30% decrease in waiting time.
1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of Machine Learning (ML), especially Large Language Models (LLMs), has brought
about groundbreaking capabilities, yet it has also raised significant social and environmental concerns
[1, 2, 3]. One of the most pressing issues is the substantial energy and water resources consumed during ML
model training and serving, which has sparked widespread concerns [4, 5, 6]. The computationally intensive
ML jobs can demand hundreds of GPU-hours and consume substantial amounts of energy for power and
water for cooling. As a result, the growing demand for ML-based applications has significantly amplified the
environmental impact of data centers, highlighting the need for modern infrastructure that is both more
efficient and sustainable specifically for AI-driven workloads [7, 8, 9]. This paper aims to enhance data
center operation efficiency and reduce the environmental footprint of modern data centers by devising an
LLM-based predictive scheduling system for allocating data center resources (e.g., GPUs) across a stream of
ML jobs efficiently. We harness the contextual understanding and predictive abilities of LLMs and combine
the predictive power with sequential decision-making that optimizes data-center operations.
As illustrated in Figure 1, our proposed method first employs an LLM that takes the ML job’s source code as
input and outputs estimates for the required resources, including execution time and GPU energy consumption.
We believe that the approach has great potential in predicting other metrics, including water consumption
and carbon emissions, if these data are available from the data center. By leveraging these estimates, the
data center can make more informed and efficient real-time decisions for GPU resource allocation, leading to
arXiv:2608.18503v1  [cs.LG]  19 Aug 2026


--- Page 2 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Figure 1: Our Proposed Pipeline
improvements such as reduced task queue waiting times and lower overall energy consumption.
This work aims to address a key limitation in the current operational pipelines of small-scale to large-scale
data centers. We focus on the prevalent practice where users submit tasks and request resources, and the
data center allocates resources based on heuristic algorithms that rely on user-provided estimates, such as
predicted task duration and resource needs [10]. The optimal resource allocation, in hindsight, depends on
the actual time and energy consumed by the tasks. However, accurately predicting these factors is nearly
impossible due to the inherent complexity of modern computing systems. Consequently, neither the user
nor the data center has precise knowledge of the optimal resources required for a given task, leading to
inefficiencies and resource wastage. Our approach introduces a unified, effective predictive model, followed
by a real-time, data-driven scheduling system that enables more efficient and sustainable resource allocation
decisions.
1.1 Our Contribution
We present a prototype pipeline that provides both methodological and practical contributions to various
aspects of data center operations, specifically tailored for AI training and inference applications. Our approach
provides methodological insights while opening up new possibilities for applications, especially within today’s
sustainability and AI-driven context. We defer more discussions on the related works to Appendix A.1.
Methodological Contributions: Our work advances the fields of data center predictive modeling and
sequential decision-making.
▶LLM-based Versatile Predictive Model: While many predictive methods exist for data center operations,
to our best knowledge, we are the first to offer a comprehensive, end-to-end solution that takes source
code as input and outputs estimations of interest. Our model has the potential to be compatible with any
user-submitted task and can predict any measurable metric the data center requires. The strength of our
approach lies in the fact that LLM-generated representations are more informative and generalizable than
handcrafted features, leading to improved predictive performance and enhanced operational efficiency.
▶Fully Automated Predictive Scheduling System: This approach enables the possibility of a fully auto-
mated predictive scheduling system. By adopting our unified framework, the system is capable of handling
any user-submitted tasks and providing estimations of interest directly. This was previously unattainable
2


--- Page 3 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Figure 2: Illustration of our unified predictive approach. Notably, previous methods were unable to handle
tasks that had not been seen before, or composite tasks (e.g., training a CNN followed by an LSTM).
However, the generalization capacity of LLMs allows our model to effectively manage such cases, making it
adaptable to a wider variety of task types and combinations.
(see Figure 3), as traditional prediction methods were highly task-specific (e.g., CNN-only or LLM-only),
and could only cover a limited number of task types. Moreover, each type of task required separate
prediction models and handcrafted features, significantly limiting the flexibility and scalability of these
methods.
▶Sequential Decision-Making Algorithms: Our predictive framework is complemented by a sequential
decision-making algorithm for optimizing resource allocation. This problem arises from the area of
reusable resource allocation and queuing control, where no analytical solution exists. We propose a
data-driven decision-making algorithm and implement it in collaboration with a small data center. Our
algorithm significantly outperforms the baseline scheduling rule, reducing energy consumption by 32%
and queuing delays by 30%. This approach leads to more effective data-center management, especially
given the growing emphasis on sustainability.
Application-Level Contributions: The unique features of our methodology—an end-to-end predictive model
and its compatibility with diverse task types and estimation targets—offer substantial potential for developing
next-generation AI-driven infrastructures in data centers.
▶Practical Deployment: Our pipeline executes within one second, enabling a cost-effective, fully automated
predictive scheduling system. Additionally, training and deploying the model within data centers is
straightforward and can be effective even with a limited amount of data, making it particularly practical
for real-world data center operations.
▶Multi-Purpose Sustainable Data Center Operations: Our method is versatile enough to predict a wide
range of metrics, including time and energy, and we believe it can also predict carbon emissions and water
3


--- Page 4 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
consumption. Unlike previous target-specific approaches, which were limited to particular models, our
unified framework offers an all-in-one solution that addresses a broad array of predictive needs, providing
key insights for building more sustainable and environmentally friendly data center infrastructures.
2. Problem Formulation
The Prediction Problem. Consider a data center equipped with various types of GPUs, where machine
learning tasks arrive sequentially. The data center must decide which type of GPU to allocate to each arriving
task (noting that the number of GPUs is often specified in the user-submitted code or command input).
Let x represent the source code submitted by the user, and z represent the data center’s decision, which
corresponds to the type of GPU to allocate for executing the task. A decision z results in outcomes including
the time required to complete the task, denoted by t, and the energy consumption using configuration z
to complete task x, denoted by e. The relationship between the outcomes and the decision is modeled by
functions f and g, such that
t := f (x, z),
e := g(x, z).
Here we note that these functions f and g are data-center-specific, they depend on the infrastructure of the
data center, for example, bandwidth, CPUs, memory, storage, communication, system setup, software stack,
etc. In general, characterizing the functions f (x, z) and g(x, z) is highly challenging due to the complexity of
modern computing systems.
Prediction using Large Language Models. To tackle the prediction problem, we employ Large Language
Models (LLMs) [11, 12, 13]. For simplicity, we refer readers to [14] for a detailed explanation of decoder-
based Transformers and LLM architectures. In this paper, we use fθ and gθ as shorthand notations to represent
LLMs, where θ encapsulates all the model parameters. fθ and gθ take two inputs: the task’s source code x
and the data center’s decision z. The rationale is that the LLM can effectively analyze and interpret the task’s
source code, transforming it into meaningful representations; these representations, when combined with
the GPU configuration z, allow the model to produce estimates such that:
fθ(x, z) ≈f (x, z),
gθ(x, z) ≈g(x, z).
To justify our LLM-based approach, we highlight two key features of LLMs that make them particularly
appealing in our context:
▶Contextual comprehension and feature extraction. LLMs are renowned for their superior ability to
comprehend the context in the source code and extract features, referred to as representations. With a
large corpus of pre-training data, LLMs and other natural language models (NLP) can discern essential
parts of the code with relevant information, transform them into representations containing meaningful
information [15, 16], and leverage these vectors to predict time, energy consumption, and other metrics.
▶Generalization. Another remarkable capability of LLMs is their ability to generalize [17]. Even if the
pre-training dataset does not cover all possible examples within the function domains, LLMs can still
recognize patterns in the dataset and extend their learned knowledge to achieve reasonably accurate
approximations.
2.1 Model Architecture - Prediction
In this section, we formally describe the architecture of our prediction model. Our approach utilizes a
pre-trained LLM for extracting source code representations and applies a probe [18, 19, 20, 21] to train a
4


--- Page 5 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Figure 3: Illustration of our model architecture. Our streamlined design is easy and fast to implement,
highly flexible, and generalizable across a variety of tasks. Notice that to estimate other quantities of interest,
we simply need to add additional probes. In contrast, previous methods required different handcrafted
features and separate prediction models for each task, making them far less flexible and scalable. The lower
graph illustrates the performance difference, where points closer to the straight line indicate more accurate
predictions. The performance is evaluated under test sets with additional adversarially generated data, and
our method outperforms the previous approach ([22] and [23]) in both accuracy and robustness. Notably,
the previous method shows consistent systematic bias, likely due to its reliance on “physical” features like
the number of forward/backward passes and layer depth, which lack generalizability.
supervised model that predicts the quantity of interest. Figure 3 illustrates the architecture and the different
performance compared to previous methods.
▶Extracting Representations: We adopt a pre-trained LLM to extract task representations, modeled as
a function lθ1(·) : V →Rd, where V denotes the space of source code, and Rd is the d-dimensional
embedding space for mapped representations. Here, θ1 encapsulates the LLM’s parameters. Note that
lθ1(·) refers to the LLM without its final linear and softmax layers, and for the last layer, it outputs the last
token’s representation, which is a d-dimensional vector.
▶Probing: Probing involves taking the generated representations and predicting the target value using a
linear regression or shallow neural network. We denote this probe as hθ2(·, ·) : Rd × Z →R, where θ2
represents the parameters of the probe and Z denotes the decision space (e.g., the types of GPUs).
Thus, our predictive model for the execution time can be represented as fθ(x, z) = hθ2(lθ1(x), z). For the
energy estimation function gθ(x, z), we use the same representation but train a separate probe, denoted qθ2,
such that gθ(x, z) = qθ2(lθ1(x), z). Note that θ, θ1, and θ2 refer to classes of parameters, indicating that the
parameter dimensions are the same across functions, though these functions do not necessarily share the
5


--- Page 6 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
same parameters.
Advantage over Previous Methods. We identify the key factor that could explain the advantage of our
method. As mentioned earlier, the challenging part of data-center operations arises from the complexity of
modern computer systems. We first give a notation that characterizes the previous approaches.
▶For estimating execution time t = f (x, z) and energy consumption e = g(x, z), previous methods rely
on handcrafted features, denoted by ut = lt(x) for time and ue = le(x) for energy, where lt(·) and le(·)
represent the feature extraction functions. Importantly, the design of lt(·) and le(·) varies significantly
depending on the target variable and prediction context, making them different for each prediction task.
▶Separate models are then trained for each target, such as ht(·, ·) for time and he(·, ·) for energy, resulting
in the following approximations: t ≈ht(lt(x), z) and e ≈he(le(x), z). To account for the dependence on
z, which represents the GPU choices, several estimation techniques attempt to model the architecture
differences between GPUs. While this approach makes sense physically, it suffers from a lack of flexibility
and scalability. Modeling the dependence on z is typically restricted to specific types of source code x and
GPU choices z, rendering the models unable to generalize to unseen tasks or GPU configurations.
Our approach is better in terms of the architecture for various reasons.
▶Better Representation. It has been demonstrated in various domains that representations extracted by pre-
trained models are significantly more effective than handcrafted features. In this context, our prediction
task can also be viewed as a form of feature extraction akin to Natural Language Processing (NLP), where
pre-trained models capture richer and more comprehensive information. These representations are more
generalizable and universal, making them applicable to a wide variety of prediction tasks related to the
characteristics of the source code.
▶Data-Driven Predictive Modeling. Many traditional predictive models rely on the intrinsic characteristics
of the underlying machine learning model, such as CNNs, where predictions are made by explicitly
calculating factors like the number of forward/backward passes and the layer depth. While these “physical”
models can achieve high accuracy when the test environment perfectly matches the assumptions, they
often fall short in data-center operations. For instance, even tasks that train the same CNN architecture
may exhibit variations in execution time due to differences in the way the code is written. Additionally,
many modern tasks involve training and inference across multiple models, alongside various other function
implementations. In such settings, physically based predictive models lack the flexibility and adaptability
needed for accurate predictions. In contrast, our data-driven approach is flexible enough to learn the
inherent relationships between the source code, the characteristics of computer systems and GPUs, and a
variety of targeted metrics.
▶Less Data Hungry. Traditional methods often require large amounts of source code examples to train
predictive models effectively. In contrast, by leveraging a pretrained LLM, which has already been trained
on terabytes of data, we capitalize on the model’s superior understanding of contextual knowledge. This
allows us to obtain a highly effective feature extractor with far less training data, improving both data
efficiency and performance. Indeed, our predictive model is trained using only a little more than 500
source code examples, each paired with corresponding results for energy consumption and execution
time across different GPUs in the server.
▶Generalization for GPU Dependence. Another advantage of our approach is its ability to maximize the
generalization power of the LLM’s representation across different downstream tasks. By utilizing the same
representation for every prediction task and maintaining a consistent structure for the downstream probe,
our method facilitates the discovery of patterns across different GPU configurations. This consistency
6


--- Page 7 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
preserves the model’s generalization capacity, ensuring its adaptability to various GPU architectures. Such
a factor is missing in previous methods, which followed a more restricted modeling approach, limiting
their flexibility and ability to generalize across diverse hardware setups.
Training Process. To train our predictive model, for simplicity we assume the parameters of the pretrained
LLM lθ1(·) remain fixed, and we will discuss the practical training procedure in a follow-up remark. We first
collect a dataset D consisting of the representations of the source code lθ1(x) and the corresponding execution
results, including time t and energy e, across different GPU configurations z. Each task x is executed on
multiple GPUs to measure both time and energy consumption. Let |Z| denote the cardinality of the decision
space, i.e., the number of available GPUs. The training set, with size n, can be written as:
D =
{︁(︁
lθ1(xi), {tij, eij}|Z|
j=1
)︁}︁n
i=1 ,
where tij = f (xi, j) and eij = g(xi, j) are the time and energy required for task xi when executed on
GPU z = j. Using this dataset, we train two separate probes: hθ2(·) for time prediction , and qθ2(·) for
energy prediction. The goal is to minimize the error between the actual values tij, eij and the predictions
hθ2(lθ1(xi), j) and qθ2(lθ1(xi), j) respectively. Since, for simplicity, we assume θ1 is fixed, the loss for time
prediction is Lt(θ2) =
1
n|Z|
∑︀n
i=1
∑︀|Z|
j=1
(︀
tij −hθ2(lθ1(xi), j)
)︀2 , and the loss for energy prediction is: Le(θ2) =
1
n|Z|
∑︀n
i=1
∑︀|Z|
j=1
(︀
eij −qθ2(lθ1(xi), j)
)︀2 .
We remark that the training process described above represents the simplest version for illustrative purposes.
In practice, the training process can be more complex, and we will address this here.
▶One limitation of the approach presented is that the data center would need to run all submitted code
to obtain execution time and energy consumption estimates. However, data centers can leverage their
existing user-submitted codebase and operational data. By recording execution time, energy consumption,
and even metrics like carbon emissions and water usage (if measurable), data centers can accumulate vast
amounts of data to train the probes effectively. This method allows data centers to continuously refine
their predictive models without the need for additional computational overhead.
▶Another limitation of the current approach is that we fix the parameters θ1 of the pretrained LLM and
only train the probe parameters θ2. While this approach simplifies the training process, it may not fully
utilize the potential of the model. In practice, we can enhance performance by fine-tuning the LLM or
incorporating more advanced techniques like Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
[11] or incorporating a reward model [24]. Based on the potential benefits of fine-tuning, RLHF, and
reward models, these approaches offer even greater possibilities for improving predictive performance.
These enhancements will be considered as part of future work.
2.2 Problem Formulation: Decision-Making
Constraints. Consider a data center equipped with |Z| = M types of GPUs, where tasks i with source code
xi arrive sequentially in time, and the data center must decide which GPU type zi ∈Z to allocate (notice
that the task’s source code xi also specify its preference on GPUs, and we can model this by constraining
the action set Z). The GPU resources are limited and are represented by c = [c1, · · · , cM]⊤, where cj is
the total number of GPUs of type j. If no GPUs are available, the task is placed in a waiting queue. The
total available GPU resources at any time s are represented by c(s) = [c1(s), · · · , cM(s)]⊤, where cj(s) is the
available resource at time s for GPU type j.
7


--- Page 8 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Dynamics. Since all the tasks arrive sequentially, and the task arrival follows a stochastic process, let us
denote by N(T) the total number of tasks arrived during time [0, T], and for each task i, let si represent
the arrival time. If there are sufficient non-occupied GPUs available, and we assign zi = j to task i, then aij
number of corresponding inventory will be temporarily occupied, hence taken out from cj(si). Once aij of
GPU j are assigned to xj, the task will be running for ti = f (xi, zi) amount of time. If we denote by A(s) the
active set that contains all tasks that are still running at time s, then i ∈A(s) for s ∈(si, si + ti).
Waiting Queue. Let Q(s) denote the set of waiting tasks at time s. If a task xi cannot be immediately
processed due to insufficient GPU resources, it is placed in the set Q(s). If task xi has been put in the queue,
we denote by wi the time it spent in the queue, which depends on factors including other tasks in the waiting
queue, the current tasks that are active with their corresponding GPU allocations, and the decision-making
model.
Decision-Making Model. We aim to find a decision-making policy π that takes 4 inputs: the current task
feature x, the current time s, the current inventory level c(s), and the historical information up to the
current time Hs. The policy can be deterministic or stochastic, and the range of the policy π is Z ∪∅. If
π(x, s, c(s), H) ∈Z, we assign the task GPU of type π(x, s, c(s), H), and if π(x, s, c(s), H) = ∅, we put this
task in the waiting queue. We denote by Π the space of policies that satisfy the condition described above.
Our goal is to solve the following objective function, which is a combination of the task completion time, the
waiting time, and energy cost. (Notice that these times are directly affected by the policy π, and we denote
by S = maxi∈N(T){ti + wi} the time at which all the tasks are finished.)
minπ∈Π
N(T)
∑︁
i=1
(αti + βwi + γei) ,
s.t.
N(T)
∑︁
i=1
aijI(i ∈A(s) and zi = j) ≤cj,
for all s ∈[0, S] and j ∈Z,
where α, β, and γ are the weights assigned to execution time, waiting time, and energy cost. This formulation
indeed resembles an online allocation problem with reusable resources, as discussed in [25, 26]. However,
two key factors differentiate our work from existing studies in the literature: (i) Multi-purpose objective:
while traditional allocation problems typically focus on optimizing a single reward or objective, our approach
involves multiple goals. This multi-purpose objective requires balancing multiple criteria rather than relying
on a single reward function, adding a layer of complexity not addressed by standard models of online
allocation. (ii) Waiting queue: In our problem, there is a waiting queue of tasks that influences decision-
making. The policy π must account for tasks already in the queue (as inferred from the history H) in addition
to handling new arrivals. This contrasts with standard resource allocation models, which usually make
decisions based solely on newly arriving tasks, without considering previously queued tasks. This interaction
between the queue and decision-making introduces an additional layer of complexity. In summary, these
challenges highlight that existing works can not provide (near) optimal solutions for our problem. This
necessitates the development of algorithms to effectively address these complexities.
We note that for each task xi, with the predictive model, the data center can incorporate the prediction
results of time and energy, ˆti := fθ(xi, zi) and ˆei := gθ(xi, zi), into their decision-making process. This is
because this information can be made available within 1 second after accessing the source code xi, and does
not rely on future information. Notice that this decision-making model is also applicable to other objectives,
for example, water consumption and carbon emission, if corresponding data is provided by the data center.
We conducted our experiment in collaboration with a data center, collecting two months of operational
8


--- Page 9 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
data from 07/01/2024 to 09/01/2024. As shown in Figure 4 (a), the task arrival times exhibit high non-
stationarity. During this period, we recorded the characteristics of tasks, including execution time and energy
consumption across different GPUs. This dataset enabled us to backtest our decision-making algorithms that
rely on predictions from the LLM-based model.
We propose two algorithms: Greedy (Algorithm 1), where we follow a first-come-first-served rule and the GPU
type is selected greedily based on the smallest estimated objective value αˆtij + βwi + γˆeij, and value-based
(Algorithm 2), which is inspired by the algorithm for the multiple knapsack problem [27]. We compare the
performance of these algorithms against the current baseline allocation policy of the data center, with the
results presented in Figure 4. Both algorithms outperform the baseline, with the Value-based algorithm
achieving a 32% reduction in energy consumption and a 30% reduction in task waiting time. The Value-based
method outperforms the Greedy method because it considers all tasks in the waiting queue and accordingly
assigns them based on their “values” of reducing the waiting time and energy cost, rather than following a
simple first-come-first-served rule as in the Greedy algorithm. These results are consistent with theoretical
insights from Spencer et al. [28], Wagner et al. [29]. More experimental details can be found in Appendix
A.3.
Model
TWT (s)
TDT
CRT(s)
TEC (kWh)
Simple
3,135,824.01
29.79
16,924,533.71
470.69
Value-based
2,186,166.49
22.50
16,565,627.33
322.07
Improvement (%)
30.28%
24.47%
2.12%
31.58%
Table 1: Performance gain for our algorithm implemented in data centers. Here, TWT stands for total
waiting time, TDT stands for total delayed tasks, the tasks that have to wait, CRT stands for cumulative
running time, and TEC stands for the total energy cost.
a Task Arrival time
b Number of Waiting Tasks
c Real-time Energy Consumption
Figure 4: (a) Task arrival pattern and (b), (c) performance comparison among the proposed predictive
decision-making algorithms, Value-based and Greedy (see Appendix A.3.1), and the benchmark algorithm,
Simple Rule. The Simple Rule assigns the available GPU type to the first task in the waiting queue, following
a first-come-first-served policy when sufficient GPUs are available. If multiple GPU types are available, the
most powerful one (e.g., A100) is selected.
9


--- Page 10 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
3. Other Extension
In this section, we discuss relevant extensions to our pipeline that align with data center practices. Our
prototype is designed using a pre-trained LLM with strong capabilities in code comprehension and completion,
coupled with a probe trained on 500 source-code files. Although we are able to achieve good performance with
a relatively small dataset of 500 source-code files, this approach still risks poor out-of-sample performance.
Due to variations in the coding practices of machine learning engineers—such as differences in variable
names, function abstractions, and comments—the contextual information represented in the source code
can vary significantly. Even if two codes are functionally equivalent, resulting in identical execution times
and energy consumption, the representations generated by the LLM can be quite different.
This issue reflects an inconsistency problem. Formally, there may exist two tasks, x1 and x2, such that the
representations differ noticeably (lθ1(x1)̸ = lθ1(x2)), but the execution times (and energy consumption) are
identical: hθ2(lθ1(x1), z) = hθ2(lθ1(x2), z). We adopt another LLM, referred to as the Align-LLM, to address
this issue and mitigate potential out-of-distribution (OOD) estimation errors, which could otherwise degrade
model performance.
Figure 5: Architecture of the extended pipeline to resolve out-of-distribution tasks
As illustrated in Figure 5, while data centers can gradually accumulate a code base to improve prediction
performance for both in-distribution and out-of-distribution tasks, we propose a novel algorithm that partially
resolves the OOD issue, showcasing the flexibility and practicality of our pipeline. The architecture and
experimental details can be found in Appendix A.2
The extended architecture first takes the source code as input and extracts representations using the pre-
trained LLM. These representations are compared against representation clusters of the tasks from the local
codebase to assess whether the current task’s representation deviates significantly from those in the training
set. If not, the task is passed to the probe for estimation. Otherwise, the Align-LLM assists by extracting
key information from the source code, allowing the data center to identify similar code from its codebase.
Next, Align-LLM rewrites the source code based on the style of the similar sample. The rewritten code,
although functionally identical to the original, adopts a more familiar written style to the pre-trained LLM,
aligning better with the LLM’s representations in the training dataset and enhancing the performance of the
downstream probe.
We highlight key insights from our experiments. First, by computing representation distances for the source
code in the probe’s training dataset, we observe that different task types tend to form distinct clusters
(Figure 6 (a)). Second, as shown in Figures 6 (b) and (c), when source code with the same functionality
10


--- Page 11 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
is rewritten by different users or engineers, its embedding diverges from the original cluster, leading to
significantly reduced predictive accuracy due to the probe encountering out-of-distribution inputs. However,
when we apply Align-LLM to rewrite the code while following the style of the original task, the resulting
representation is closer to the original distribution (see indexes 4 vs. 5 and 6 vs. 7 in Figure 6 (b)). Although
the rewritten representation is not identical, possibly due to the Align-LLM’s style differing slightly from
human coding styles, the probe can predict the rewritten code more accurately thanks to the generalizability
of our predictive model.
a Distance of Task Clusters
b Distance before/after rewrite
c Prediction before rewrite
d Prediction after rewrite
Figure 6: Figure (a) displays the heat map of embedding distances between two classes. Indexes 0–3
represent tasks training the ViT model, while the remaining indexes correspond to tasks training the GAN
Model. In Figure (b), indexes 0 and 1 represent ViT model training tasks, indexes 2 and 4 represent
out-of-distribution ViT model tasks, and indexes 3 and 6 are LLM-rewritten versions of the tasks of index 2
and 4. Figures (c) and (d) compare the prediction performance of the execution time for the
out-of-distribution tasks before(c) and after(d) the LLM rewrite.
11


--- Page 12 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
4. Conclusion
We propose an LLM-based predictive scheduling system for data center operations aimed at enhancing
the efficiency and sustainability of AI training. Our system leverages a pre-trained LLM specialized in
code comprehension to extract representations of source code and utilizes sequential decision-making
algorithms to optimize the scheduling of computational resources. Compared to traditional prediction
methods, our architecture design and the use of LLMs offer significantly improved generalizability, flexibility,
and practicality. Complemented by the decision-making scheduling algorithms, our approach achieves a 32%
reduction in energy consumption and a 30% reduction in waiting times in real data centers. These results
demonstrate the strong potential of our method in advancing AI infrastructure.
References
[1] Sundar Pichai.
Climate change is humanity’s next big moonshot.
https://blog.google/
outreachinitiatives/sustainability/dear-earth/, 2024. Google Blog.
[2] Amazon.
Our
carbon
footprint.
https://sustainability.aboutamazon.com/
climate-solutions, 2024. Amazon Sustainability.
[3] Melanie Nakagawa and Brad Smith.
On the road to 2030:
Our 2022 environmen-
tal sustainability report.
https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2023/05/10/
2022-environmental-sustainability-report/, 2023. Microsoft Blog.
[4] Katherine Blunt and Jennifer Hiller.
Big Tech’s latest obsession is finding enough en-
ergy.
The Wall Street Journal, 2024.
URL https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/
big-techs-latest-obsession-is-finding-enough-energy-f00055b2.
[5] Cristina
Criddle
and
Kenza
Bryan.
AI
boom
sparks
concern
over
Big
Tech’s
water
consumption.
The
Financial
Times,
2024.
URL
https://www.ft.com/content/
6544119e-a511-4cfa-9243-13b8cf855c13.
[6] Olivia
Solon.
Drought-stricken
communities
push
back
against
data
cen-
ters.
NBC
News,
2021.
https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/internet/
drought-stricken-communities-push-back-against-data-centers-n1271344.
[7] Ricardo Bianchini, Christian Belady, and Anand Sivasubramaniam. Datacenter power and energy
management: past, present, and future. IEEE Micro, 2024.
[8] Yuzhuo Li, Mariam Mughees, Yize Chen, and Yunwei Ryan Li. The unseen ai disruptions for power
grids: Llm-induced transients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11416, 2024.
[9] Lynn H Kaack, Priya L Donti, Emma Strubell, George Kamiya, Felix Creutzig, and David Rolnick.
Aligning artificial intelligence with climate change mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 12(6):518–527,
2022.
[10] Muhammad Tirmazi, Adam Barker, Nan Deng, Md E Haque, Zhijing Gene Qin, Steven Hand, Mor
Harchol-Balter, and John Wilkes. Borg: the next generation. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth European
Conference on Computer Systems, pages 1–14, 2020.
12


--- Page 13 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
[11] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[12] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
[13] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[14] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017.
[15] Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipanjan Das, et al. What do you learn from context?
probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
[16] Mohammad Taher Pilehvar and Jose Camacho-Collados. Embeddings in natural language processing:
Theory and advances in vector representations of meaning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2020.
[17] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
[18] Guillaume Alain. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier probes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.01644, 2016.
[19] Alec Radford, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to generate reviews and discovering
sentiment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01444, 2017.
[20] Ivan Vulić, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Robert Litschko, Goran Glavaš, and Anna Korhonen. Probing pretrained
language models for lexical semantics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 7222–7240, 2020.
[21] Lining Zhang, Mengchen Wang, Liben Chen, and Wenxin Zhang. Probing gpt-3’s linguistic knowledge
on semantic tasks. In Proceedings of the Fifth BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting
Neural Networks for NLP, pages 297–304, 2022.
[22] Ermao Cai, Da-Cheng Juan, Dimitrios Stamoulis, and Diana Marculescu. Neuralpower: Predict and
deploy energy-efficient convolutional neural networks. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning, pages
622–637. PMLR, 2017.
[23] Daniel Justus, John Brennan, Stephen Bonner, and Andrew Stephen McGough. Predicting the compu-
tational cost of deep learning models. In 2018 IEEE international conference on big data (Big Data),
pages 3873–3882. IEEE, 2018.
[24] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
13


--- Page 14 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
[25] Yiwei Chen, Retsef Levi, and Cong Shi. Revenue management of reusable resources with advanced
reservations. Production and Operations Management, 26(5):836–859, 2017.
[26] Xilin Zhang and Wang Chi Cheung. Online resource allocation for reusable resources. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.02855, 2022.
[27] AHG Rinnooy Kan, Leen Stougie, and Carlo Vercellis. A class of generalized greedy algorithms for the
multi-knapsack problem. Discrete applied mathematics, 42(2-3):279–290, 1993.
[28] Joel Spencer, Madhu Sudan, and Kuang Xu. Queueing with future information. ACM SIGMETRICS
Performance Evaluation Review, 41(3):40–42, 2014.
[29] Benjamin Wagner, André Kohn, and Thomas Neumann. Self-tuning query scheduling for analytical
workloads. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data, pages 1879–
1891, 2021.
[30] Thanh-Phuong Pham, Juan J Durillo, and Thomas Fahringer. Predicting workflow task execution time
in the cloud using a two-stage machine learning approach. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 8
(1):256–268, 2017.
[31] Mustafa Daraghmeh, Anjali Agarwal, and Yaser Jararweh. A multilevel learning model for predicting cpu
utilization in cloud data centers. In 2023 IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing,
Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and Big Data Computing, Intl Conf
on Cyber Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), pages 1016–1023.
IEEE, 2023.
[32] Sheetal Garg, Rohit Ahuja, Raman Singh, and Ivan Perl. Gmm-lstm: a component driven resource
utilization prediction model leveraging lstm and gaussian mixture model. Cluster Computing, 26(6):
3547–3563, 2023.
[33] Muhammad Hafizhuddin Hilman, Maria Alejandra Rodriguez, and Rajkumar Buyya. Task runtime
prediction in scientific workflows using an online incremental learning approach. In 2018 IEEE/ACM
11th International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC), pages 93–102. IEEE, 2018.
[34] Kenneth O’Neal and Philip Brisk. Predictive modeling for cpu, gpu, and fpga performance and power
consumption: A survey. In 2018 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), pages
763–768. IEEE, 2018.
[35] Charlotte Rodriguez, Laura Degioanni, Laetitia Kameni, Richard Vidal, and Giovanni Neglia. Evaluating
the energy consumption of machine learning: Systematic literature review and experiments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.15128, 2024.
[36] Ghazanfar Ali, Mert Side, Sridutt Bhalachandra, Nicholas J Wright, and Yong Chen. Performance-
aware energy-efficient gpu frequency selection using dnn-based models. In Proceedings of the 52nd
International Conference on Parallel Processing, pages 433–442, 2023.
[37] Ling Huang, Jinzhu Jia, Bin Yu, Byung-Gon Chun, Petros Maniatis, and Mayur Naik. Predicting
execution time of computer programs using sparse polynomial regression. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 23, 2010.
[38] Haifeng Wang and Yunpeng Cao. Predicting power consumption of gpus with fuzzy wavelet neural
networks. Parallel Computing, 44:18–36, 2015.
14


--- Page 15 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
[39] X Yu Geoffrey, Yubo Gao, Pavel Golikov, and Gennady Pekhimenko. Habitat: A {Runtime-Based}
computational performance predictor for deep neural network training. In 2021 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 21), pages 503–521, 2021.
[40] Qingqing Cao, Yash Kumar Lal, Harsh Trivedi, Aruna Balasubramanian, and Niranjan Balasubramanian.
Irene: Interpretable energy prediction for transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01199, 2021.
[41] Lu Bai, Weixing Ji, Qinyuan Li, Xilai Yao, Wei Xin, and Wanyi Zhu. Dnnabacus: Toward accurate
computational cost prediction for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12095, 2022.
[42] João Guerreiro, Aleksandar Ilic, Nuno Roma, and Pedro Tomás. Gpu static modeling using ptx and
deep structured learning. IEEE Access, 7:159150–159161, 2019.
[43] Meiling Zhou, Jie Chen, Haiyang Hu, Jiacheng Yu, Zhongjin Li, and Hua Hu. Deeptle: Learning
code-level features to predict code performance before it runs. In 2019 26th Asia-Pacific Software
Engineering Conference (APSEC), pages 252–259. IEEE, 2019.
[44] Eugenio Gianniti, Li Zhang, and Danilo Ardagna. Performance prediction of gpu-based deep learning
applications. In 2018 30th International Symposium on Computer Architecture and High Performance
Computing (SBAC-PAD), pages 167–170. IEEE, 2018.
[45] Christopher A Metz, Mehran Goli, and Rolf Drechsler. Ml-based power estimation of convolutional
neural networks on gpgpus. In 2022 25th International Symposium on Design and Diagnostics of
Electronic Circuits and Systems (DDECS), pages 166–171. IEEE, 2022.
[46] Qi Zhao, Hailong Yang, Zhongzhi Luan, and Depei Qian. Poigem: A programming-oriented instruction
level gpu energy model for cuda program. In Algorithms and Architectures for Parallel Processing: 13th
International Conference, ICA3PP 2013, Vietri sul Mare, Italy, December 18-20, 2013, Proceedings, Part I
13, pages 129–142. Springer, 2013.
[47] Eduardo Pinheiro, Ricardo Bianchini, Enrique V Carrera, and Taliver Heath. Load balancing and
unbalancing for power and performance in cluster-based systems. 2001.
[48] Jeffrey S Chase, Darrell C Anderson, Prachi N Thakar, Amin M Vahdat, and Ronald P Doyle. Managing
energy and server resources in hosting centers. ACM SIGOPS operating systems review, 35(5):103–116,
2001.
[49] Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Phil Leech, David Irwin, and Jeffrey Chase. Ensemble-level power man-
agement for dense blade servers. ACM SIGARCH computer architecture news, 34(2):66–77, 2006.
[50] Xiaobo Fan, Wolf-Dietrich Weber, and Luiz Andre Barroso. Power provisioning for a warehouse-sized
computer. ACM SIGARCH computer architecture news, 35(2):13–23, 2007.
[51] Qiang Wu, Qingyuan Deng, Lakshmi Ganesh, Chang-Hong Hsu, Yun Jin, Sanjeev Kumar, Bin Li, Justin
Meza, and Yee Jiun Song. Dynamo: Facebook’s data center-wide power management system. ACM
SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 44(3):469–480, 2016.
[52] Richard Evans and Jim Gao. Deepmind ai reduces google data centre cooling bill by 40Google DeepMind
blog, 2016.
15


--- Page 16 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
[53] Eli Cortez, Anand Bonde, Alexandre Muzio, Mark Russinovich, Marcus Fontoura, and Ricardo Bianchini.
Resource central: Understanding and predicting workloads for improved resource management in
large cloud platforms. In Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages
153–167, 2017.
[54] Avita Katal, Susheela Dahiya, and Tanupriya Choudhury. Energy efficiency in cloud computing data
centers: a survey on software technologies. Cluster Computing, 26(3):1845–1875, 2023.
[55] Alexandre Lacoste, Alexandra Luccioni, Victor Schmidt, and Thomas Dandres. Quantifying the carbon
emissions of machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09700, 2019.
[56] Thomas Anderson, Adam Belay, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Asaf Cidon, and Irene Zhang. Treehouse: A case
for carbon-aware datacenter software. ACM SIGENERGY Energy Informatics Review, 3(3):64–70, 2023.
[57] Gül Nihal Güğül, Furkan Gökçül, and Ursula Eicker. Sustainability analysis of zero energy consumption
data centers with free cooling, waste heat reuse and renewable energy systems: A feasibility study.
Energy, 262:125495, 2023.
[58] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Brijesh Warrier, Nithish Mahalingam, and
Ricardo Bianchini. Characterizing power management opportunities for llms in the cloud. In Proceedings
of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3, pages 207–222, 2024.
[59] Jordi Vilaplana, Francesc Solsona, Ivan Teixidó, Jordi Mateo, Francesc Abella, and Josep Rius. A
queuing theory model for cloud computing. The Journal of Supercomputing, 69:492–507, 2014.
[60] Qiaomin Xie and Yi Lu. Priority algorithm for near-data scheduling: Throughput and heavy-traffic
optimality. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), pages 963–972. IEEE,
2015.
[61] Einollah Jafarnejad Ghomi, Amir Masoud Rahmani, and Nooruldeen Nasih Qader. Applying queue
theory for modeling of cloud computing: A systematic review. Concurrency and Computation: Practice
and Experience, 31(17):e5186, 2019.
[62] Ding Ding, Xiaocong Fan, Yihuan Zhao, Kaixuan Kang, Qian Yin, and Jing Zeng. Q-learning based
dynamic task scheduling for energy-efficient cloud computing. Future Generation Computer Systems,
108:361–371, 2020.
[63] Shreshth Tuli, Shashikant Ilager, Kotagiri Ramamohanarao, and Rajkumar Buyya. Dynamic scheduling
for stochastic edge-cloud computing environments using a3c learning and residual recurrent neural
networks. IEEE transactions on mobile computing, 21(3):940–954, 2020.
[64] Manish Purohit, Zoya Svitkina, and Ravi Kumar. Improving online algorithms via ml predictions.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
[65] Thodoris Lykouris and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Competitive caching with machine learned advice. Journal
of the ACM (JACM), 68(4):1–25, 2021.
[66] Sreenivas Gollapudi and Debmalya Panigrahi. Online algorithms for rent-or-buy with expert advice. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2319–2327. PMLR, 2019.
16


--- Page 17 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
[67] Chen-Yu Hsu, Piotr Indyk, Dina Katabi, and Ali Vakilian. Learning-based frequency estimation algo-
rithms. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[68] Kuang Xu and Carri W Chan. Using future information to reduce waiting times in the emergency
department via diversion. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 18(3):314–331, 2016.
[69] Jon Feldman, Monika Henzinger, Nitish Korula, Vahab S Mirrokni, and Cliff Stein. Online stochastic
packing applied to display ad allocation. In European Symposium on Algorithms, pages 182–194.
Springer, 2010.
[70] Xiaocheng Li and Yinyu Ye. Online linear programming: Dual convergence, new algorithms, and regret
bounds. Operations Research, 70(5):2948–2966, 2021.
[71] Guanting Chen, Xiaocheng Li, and Yinyu Ye. An improved analysis of lp-based control for revenue
management. Operations Research, 72(3):1124–1138, 2024.
[72] Yanzhe Lei and Stefanus Jasin. Real-time dynamic pricing for revenue management with reusable
resources, advance reservation, and deterministic service time requirements. Operations Research, 68
(3):676–685, 2020.
[73] Kundjanasith Thonglek, Kohei Ichikawa, Keichi Takahashi, Hajimu Iida, and Chawanat Nakasan.
Improving resource utilization in data centers using an lstm-based prediction model. In 2019 IEEE
international conference on cluster computing (CLUSTER), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019.
[74] Lata J Gadhavi and Madhuri D Bhavsar. Adaptive cloud resource management through workload
prediction. Energy Systems, 13(3):601–623, 2022.
17


--- Page 18 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Content of Appendix
A
Appendix
19
A.1
Discussion on related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
A.2
Experiment: Predictive model details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
A.3
Experiment: Decision-making model details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
18


--- Page 19 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
A. Appendix
A.1 Discussion on related works
Prediction based on device features. A body of literature focuses on predicting relevant metrics, such as
execution time and energy consumption, using features that summarize the characteristics of the hardware.
This approach assumes that analyzing hardware parameters and runtime data can uncover patterns that
influence these metrics. For example, [30] combines GPU runtime parameters with static hardware features,
applying regression models to predict execution time. Similarly, [31] and [32] utilize various clustering
techniques to identify operational patterns in machines based on hardware metrics, followed by sequence
modeling for accurate predictions. Conversely, [33] takes an alternative approach by first predicting hardware
behavior during code execution and then employing the KNN clustering method to forecast execution time. In
general, this stream of literature is not very related to our approach and we refer the readers to [34, 35, 36]
for a literature survey.
Prediction based on code features. Regarding code characteristics, early work by [37] used feature
engineering, extracting elements like loop counts and conditional branches, and applying sparse polynomial
regression for time prediction. Recent approaches have shifted towards deep learning, where two main
strategies dominate. One approach treats models as composed of atomic operations, with works like
[38, 22, 39, 23] using program slicing and MLPs to predict time and energy by decomposing models into layers.
The second approach leverages graph-based techniques, as in [40] and [41], which use graphs to represent
layer dependencies and employ machine learning to learn these representations. Some methods are similar
to ours in extracting code representations for prediction. For example, [42] transforms PTX instructions into
embeddings for LSTM inputs, while [43] uses attention-based Bi-LSTMs and graph convolutional networks
to automatically extract code semantics and structure. While these methods focus on extracting features,
our model generalizes across a wider variety of task types and prediction metrics using a unified, high-level
representation approach. See [44, 45, 46] for more related work.
Data center operations. Energy management in data centers has been a longstanding area of interest, with
foundational work by [47, 48, 49, 50]. As cloud computing and AI technologies emerged, software-based
approaches have been developed to improve data center operations [51, 52, 53, 54]. In today’s AI and
sustainability-driven era, there has been growing interest in carbon emissions related to AI [55, 56, 57, 58].
However, most efforts focus on software or infrastructure-level operations, whereas our approach specifically
targets algorithmic-level improvements. While there is a substantial body of literature on optimal scheduling
and queuing policies for service systems, much of this work is highly theoretical and relies on numerous
assumptions [59, 60, 61]. Additionally, many scheduling algorithms that avoid theoretical assumptions, such
as reinforcement learning-based approaches [62, 63], primarily focus on scheduling tasks but lack task-level
predictive inference capabilities, which is a core strength of our method. Additionally, we note that our focus
is specifically on the operations of data centers for AI-driven workloads, which exhibit distinct characteristics
compared to traditional data center operations considered in previous studies.
Predictive decision-making Our work is also related to the area of decision-making with future predictions
as side information. With such predictions, well-established decision algorithms, originally designed without
the benefit of foresight, can be improved [64]. Examples include problems such as caching [65], rent-or-buy
(also known as the ski rental problem) [66], frequency estimation [67], and queuing control [28, 68]. Among
these, the most closely related topic to our work is (online) resource allocation [69, 70, 71, 26]. Specifically,
Lei and Jasin [72], Chen et al. [25] examine online allocation with reusable resources (like GPUs in data
centers), where each arriving request occupies resources for only a limited period before releasing them. [73]
and [74] focus on CPU and memory utilization, adopting LSTM and other time series models to optimize
19


--- Page 20 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
resource allocation.
A.2 Experiment: Predictive model details
A.2.1. Experiment Setup
Data Generation
The training (and testing) data for the probes includes embedding features and corre-
sponding label values.
▶Embedding Features: The input features for the probe model are generated through Starcoder-7B(LLM).
Specifically, we input 500 source code files as prompts into Starcoder-7B(LLM) and extract 4608-
dimensional embedding vectors from each inference’s penultimate layer, i.e., the output of the last
transformer block. Following standard practices for sequence classification tasks, we then use the last
token’s embedding vector to represent the features of the entire code file. The 500 code files are either
carefully selected or handcrafted to ensure that each file can run independently to complete a full
computational process. These files cover a diverse set of tasks and structures, including ResNet, BERT,
GAN, ViT, VGG, and more. The minimum, average, and maximum number of tokens in the code files are
1037, 1582.26, and 2151, respectively. We ensure that the LLM’s context length is sufficient to process
the entire code file without truncation.
▶Label Values: The label values, which the probes aim to predict, are generated by running the 500 code
files on two different types of GPUs, NVIDIA A100 and NVIDIA A6000. We record the running time
and energy consumption using the official tool nvidia-smi by NVIDIA. For each code run, we open an
independent process running nvidia-smi –query-gpu=power.draw to record the real-time power
consumption with a logging interval of 1 second and compute the average power consumption. For each
code file, we run each experiment for at least twice and make sure the gap of recorded values is less than
10% of the average. We also make sure the GPUs are exclusively used by our experiments.
Probe Architecture
In our experiments, the probe model is a 3-layer dense neural network, utilizing ReLU
as the activation function, with batch normalization applied to each layer. The input dimension of 4608
aligns with the dimensions of the (input) embedding vectors. The embedding dimensions for each layer are
1024, 30, and 1, respectively.
Probe Training
We randomly separate the generated data into training data and testing data with a ratio
of 9:1. All the data are further normalized by StandardScaler. The probe models are trained using the
following configurations: a batch size of 8, 2000 training epochs, a learning rate of 1e-4, weight decay of
0.001, and L1 regularization with a penalty parameter of 1e-5. We use the Mean Squared Error (MSE) as
the loss function and AdamW as the optimizer. Additionally, we apply early stopping when the epoch loss
decreases by no more than 0.001 for 30 consecutive epochs.
Testing and Inference
To test the time needed for prediction, in the testing phase, we let the LLM Starcoder
take the source code as input, outputting the representation, and use the probe to predict the estimated
value. The inference time for 48 source codes takes 32 seconds, averaging 0.65 seconds per task. The testing
phase is carried out on 1 Nvidia RTX 6000 (Ampere Version) GPU.
20


--- Page 21 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Predictive pipeline for OOD
For the experiments in Section 3, we take gpt-4o-2024-05-13 as the Align-LLM.
With the Align-LLM, the rewrite time for the source code of 7 tasks takes 68 seconds, averaging 9.7 seconds
per task.
A.3 Experiment: Decision-making model details
In this section, we first provide detailed predictive decision-making algorithms applied in A.3. Further, due
to data privacy restrictions imposed by the collaborating data center, we present additional numerical results
across various settings using a simulation system. These results can offer managerial insights for the data
center operator and validate our choice of multi-criteria optimization.
A.3.1. Predictive Decision-Making Algorithms
In this section, we provide detailed implementations of the two types of predictive decision-making algorithms
used for GPU allocation.
Algorithm 1: Predictive Decision-Making: Greedy
Input: Current time s; GPU types Z; waiting queue Q(s); active set A(s); GPU occupation
information aij; available GPUs c(s); prediction models fθ and gθ; weights α, γ.
Estimate the running time and energy of each task i ∈A(s) ∪Q(s) for each GPU type j ∈Z:
ˆtij = fθ(xi, j),
ˆeij = gθ(xi, j).
// First-come-first-served rule
Sort Q(s) in ascending order by arrival time si;
Assign the first task to
z1 = arg min
j∈Z
(︀
αˆt1j + γˆe1j
)︀
.
Schedule task 1 when GPU type z1 has sufficient available GPUs, i.e., at
min
{︀
s′ ≥s | cz1(s′) ≥a1z1
}︀
.
The Greedy algorithm focuses on a first-come-first-served approach to allocate tasks to GPUs. At each time
step s, the algorithm estimates the running time and energy consumption for each task i on each GPU type j
using the prediction models. Once these estimates are made, the waiting queue is sorted in ascending order
of task arrival times. The algorithm assigns the first task in the queue to the GPU type selected based on
the smallest estimated value of αˆt1j + γˆe1j, reflecting a weighted combination of running time and energy
consumption. This algorithm’s simplicity makes it efficient for quick decision-making, but it may not always
optimize resource allocation across the entire queue.
The Value-Based algorithm extends beyond the Greedy approach by considering all tasks in the waiting
queue and selecting the GPU allocation based on a more strategic optimization. At each time step, the
algorithm first estimates the running time and energy consumption for each task across GPU types. However,
the next step involves computing a cost value vij for each task-GPU pair, which is a combination of the
inverse of the estimated running time ˆtij adjusted by the GPU occupancy requirement aij and a penalty term
κ ˆeij representing the energy consumption. The algorithm then constructs a set of task-GPU pairs, sorting
them in descending order based on the value vij. It allocates the GPUs to tasks based on this sorted list,
21


--- Page 22 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
Algorithm 2: Predictive Decision-Making: Value Based
Input: Current time s; GPU types Z; waiting queue Q(s); active set A(s); GPU occupation
information aij; available GPUs c(s); prediction models fθ and gθ; hyperparameter κ.
Estimate the running time and energy of each task i ∈A(s) ∪Q(s) for each GPU type j ∈Z:
ˆtij = fθ(xi, j),
ˆeij = gθ(xi, j).
Compute the value vij for each task i ∈Q(s) and GPU type j ∈Z:
vij =
1
aijˆtij
−κ ˆeij.
Construct the value set
V =
{︀(i, j, vij) | i ∈Q(s), j ∈Z
}︀
,
and sort V in descending order by vij;
foreach (i, j, vij) ∈V do
if aij ≤cj(s) then
// Assign task i to GPU type j
Set zi ←j;
Remove all tuples associated with task i:
V ←V \
{︀(i′, j′, vi′j′) ∈V | i′ = i
}︀
.
Update the available GPUs:
cj(s) ←cj(s) −aij.
else
Skip;
prioritizing higher values, and updates the available GPU resources accordingly. This method is inspired by
the algorithms in multiple knapsack problems and balances multiple objectives, such as reducing energy
consumption and running time with limited available GPUs.
A.3.2. More Simulation Experiments
Simulation Environment
We built the simulation environment using data collected from the cooperating
data center. Specifically, we first estimated a heterogeneous Poisson process to model task arrivals. And we
build a task simulator that generates the running time tij and the energy consumption eij for each arriving
task i across GPU type j. The values are randomly sampled from truncated normal distributions (truncated
above 0), with the mean and variance estimated from the collected data. Further, we assume there are
two types of GPUs (|Z| = 2) with the number of each type randomly sampled uniformly from the intervals
[10, 20] and [20, 40], respectively.
Performance under different criteria
We evaluate the performance of the proposed Algorithm 2 under
different settings, with varying emphasis on the optimization criteria. Specifically, we tune the hyperparameter
22


--- Page 23 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
κ in Algorithm 2 using independently sampled validation data, based on the following metrics: (i) waiting
time only (α = γ = 0 and β = 1) (ii) running time only (β = γ = 0 and α = 1), and (iii) energy only
(α = β = 0 and γ = 1). These settings prioritize different objectives, allowing us to compare the results and
validate the effectiveness of the proposed Algorithm 2 under various criteria. We compare the performance
of Algorithm 2 with a simple rule, which assigns the available GPU type to the first task in the waiting queue,
following a first-come-first-served policy, provided there are sufficient GPUs. When multiple GPU types are
available, the most powerful type (e.g., A100) is selected. The reported results are based on 100 testing
samples, and the validation data contains 50 samples.
Table 2 summarizes the experimental results. First, it showcases that the proposed value-based rule can
outperform the benchmark simple rule consistently in all tuning methods. In addition, it demonstrates that
the performance of the value-based rule aligns with the specific objective being emphasized during tuning.
Specifically, when tuned to minimize waiting time, it achieves the shortest waiting time (and the fewest
tasks with positive wait times). Similarly, when tuned to minimize running time, it achieves the shortest
running time. Finally, when tuned to minimize energy consumption, it achieves the lowest energy usage
during testing. We also provide visualizations of sample path levels in Figure 7.
Metric
Simple rule
Value-based rule
Waiting time
Running time
Energy
Total Waiting Time (s)
2,466,062.56
1,810,123.92
2,045,399.25
2,112,773.56
-Tasks with Wait Time
27.38
21.16
22.13
22.80
Total Running Time (s)
15,333,868.47
15,215,721.21
15,001,371.15
15,291,965.57
Total Energy Cost (kWh)
440.98
245.42
243.97
240.07
Table 2: Comparison of testing total waiting time, tasks with wait time, cumulative running time, and
energy cost for the benchmark algorithm (simple rule) and value-based models tuned under different
emphasized objectives.
23


--- Page 24 ---
LLM-Powered Predictive Decision-Making for Sustainable Data Center Operations
a Number of Waiting Tasks (Waiting time)
b Real-time Energy Consumption (Waiting time)
c Number of Waiting Tasks (Running time)
d Real-time Energy Consumption (Running time)
e Number of Waiting Tasks (Energy)
f Real-time Energy Consumption (Energy)
Figure 7: Performance comparison across different metrics for the benchmark algorithm (simple rule) and
value-based models tuned under different emphasized objectives.
24
