--- Page 1 ---
Hybrid-Adaptive Thread Tuning to Mitigate Simulation Execution Bottlenecks in
High-Performance Reinforcement Learning Inference
Jiming Su1 , Hantao Hua2 , Lujia Yin1 , Yiping Yao1 and Feng Zhu1∗
1College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology
2College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
{jimings, ht hua, yinlujia10, ypyao, zhufeng}@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract
In simulation-in-the-loop decision-making sys-
tems, reinforcement learning (RL) inference is of-
ten constrained by simulator-side execution over-
head, where workloads are highly dynamic and
sensitive to runtime thread configurations. Existing
multithreaded strategies struggle to match thread
resources before or during execution, causing re-
source contention, scheduling overhead, and re-
duced throughput. Through empirical analysis, we
identify the ratio of task execution time to schedul-
ing time as the key factor determining the optimal
thread count.
Building on this insight, we pro-
pose AutoThread, a hybrid adaptive thread-tuning
method for mitigating simulation bottlenecks in
RL inference.
AutoThread employs a Physics-
Informed Neural Operator (PINO) as a thread-
count predictor and incorporates a finite-source
M/M/1 queueing model to constrain and guide pre-
diction, enabling fast and accurate estimation under
dynamic workloads. It further performs load-aware
online fine-tuning to compensate for prediction er-
rors and refine resource allocation.
Experiments
show that AutoThread improves average speedup
by 18.4% over static strategies, achieves average
throughput of 1.7× and 1.8× that of XGBoost
and Reinforcer, respectively, and reduces execution
time by up to 83.8% compared with state-of-the-art
methods. Our code and dataset are publicly avail-
able at https://github.com/suchenjm/AutoThread.
1
Introduction
As artificial intelligence is increasingly used for decision-
making in complex dynamic systems, reinforcement learn-
ing with simulation-in-the-loop (SiL-RL) has become a core
paradigm for wireless communication network optimization
and swarm intelligence control[Feriani and Hossain, 2021;
Hu et al., 2024]. Its operational efficiency, however, directly
limits real-time decision-making. SiL-RL performance de-
pends on three components: simulation-side model compu-
tation (e.g., social network dynamic evolution models[Wu
et al., 2022]), agent-side algorithm inference (e.g., Deep
Q-Network decision-making[Zhang et al., 2021]), and their
ready task queue
thread pool
Synchronization
task
task
task
task
Execution
Scheduling
DES environment
task scheduler
task scheduler
WT
WT
WT
WT
WT
WT
WT
WT
Agent
Agent
Bottleneck
!!! 
action
Figure 1: Diagram of the DES environment execution process
communication/synchronization. As simulation models grow
increasingly complex (e.g., high-precision channel interfer-
ence models[Eldeeb and Alves, 2025] in communication net-
works or high-fidelity aerodynamic models[Riboldi et al.,
2025] in UAV swarms), the simulation side becomes the crit-
ical bottleneck[Morgado et al., 2025], increasing end-to-end
latency and impairing real-time decisions. This paper there-
fore accelerates simulation-side performance to break this
bottleneck and support efficient SiL-RL systems.
Existing SiL-RL simulation environments typically adopt
Discrete Event Simulation (DES) and use multithreading on
multicore processors for parallel acceleration[Belsare et al.,
2022].
They mainly employ two architectures:
central-
ized queues with thread pools and distributed queues with
work stealing[Risco-Mart´ın et al., 2022].
The centralized
queue, with dynamic load balancing and lower synchroniza-
tion overhead, is well suited to SiL-RL inference, where agent
activation rates and task loads fluctuate across simulation
cycles[Lin et al., 2025]. This work therefore focuses on sim-
ulation acceleration under the centralized queue architecture.
However, centralized queues are highly sensitive to the
number of worker threads (WTs): all WTs share one task
queue, and task acquisition and distribution are handled seri-
ally by the scheduler[Samadi et al., 2024]. Thus, the sched-
uler may become a serial bottleneck: as WTs increase, sched-
uler contention, lock waiting, and busy waiting rise sharply,
negating or even reversing parallel gains. Selecting WTs ac-
cording to workload characteristics is therefore key to im-
arXiv:2608.06025v1  [cs.LG]  6 Aug 2026


--- Page 2 ---
proving simulation-side performance[Li et al., 2025]. First,
the optimal WT count depends on workload intensity and
hardware factors such as core frequency, memory bandwidth,
and cache hierarchy, which vary across platforms and are hard
to know a priori. Second, SiL-RL workloads are highly dy-
namic; agent activation rates, task execution times, and inter-
action intensities fluctuate across simulation stages, making
fixed WT counts suboptimal. Runtime noise and external dis-
turbances further obscure transient interference versus persis-
tent workload shifts. Together, these factors prevent precise
WT allocation before or during runtime.
To address this, we propose AutoThread, a hybrid adap-
tive thread-tuning method for SiL-RL simulation accelera-
tion. The core idea is to construct a WT count predictor where
a neural network is guided and constrained by a theoretical
performance model. By introducing a dynamic load-aware
adaptive fine-tuning strategy, we achieve significant improve-
ments in simulation performance, thereby supporting high-
performance inference in RL decision-making systems. The
main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We open-source a large-scale multithreaded trajectory
dataset for DES environment. Through empirical anal-
ysis, we derive three findings regarding the relationship
between WT count and simulation performance.
• We
develop
a
Physics-Informed
Neural
Operator
(PINO) thread predictor, utilizing a queueing model to
constrain and guide the training process.
• We propose AutoThread, which leverages PINO-based
thread prediction and load-aware online fine-tuning to
achieve fast and adaptive WT count allocation.
2
Empirical Study
We first introduce the dataset, then empirically reveal the re-
lationship between WT count and execution performance to
guide AutoThread’s model construction and tuning strategy.
2.1
Dataset
We constructed the multithreaded trajectory dataset for the
DES environment by collecting over 10,000 multithreaded
execution samples across both Intel and AMD CPU hardware
platforms. The dataset includes two application cases:
PCS:
The
Personal
Communication
System(PCS)
[Carothers et al., 2002] is a benchmark DES environment
that simulates wireless communication processes within
a network topology and is widely used to test decision
algorithms in communication networks. In this application,
each agent represents a communication node, continuously
generating five types of communication tasks.
UAV: This is a case study based on the DES paradigm,
simulating the autonomous navigation and obstacle avoid-
ance of multiple unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) within a
specific area. The paths are derived from real-world flight
data[FlightAware, 2025]. Each agent represents a UAV, in-
volving both perception and navigation tasks.
To emulate high-fidelity simulation, we embedded array
dot products and iterative power computations into each task,
producing execution times between 10 µs and 800 µs. With
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2: Variation of speedup with WT count under different dif-
ferent application parameters, where t denotes the average task exe-
cution time and n denotes the number of agents
profiling tools, we captured each sample’s execution trajec-
tories under various WT counts. The data include hardware
utilization, application logs, and micro-architectural features,
totaling 34 variables. To our knowledge, this is the first public
DES trajectory dataset for RL systems and among the largest
single-node thread-level trace sets; we release it to support
studies on multithreaded behavior and DES acceleration.
2.2
Empirical Observations
We conduct three experiments to characterize how workload,
hardware, and micro-architectural metrics jointly affect per-
formance. Our analysis yields the following observations.
Dependence of Optimal WTs on Workload Intensity
Figure 2 shows speedup versus WT count under different
agent populations and task execution times. In UAV, each
agent always generates two fixed tasks with execution time
t; in PCS, each agent generates a variable number of tasks
whose execution times follow a Poisson distribution with
mean t. The optimal WT count is positively correlated with
average task execution time: higher workload intensity in-
creases the optimal WT count because longer tasks enlarge
parallelizable regions and let more threads improve perfor-
mance.
Conversely, with fixed execution time, the opti-
mal WT count remains nearly unchanged regardless of agent
scale(Figure 2(b)). The variance in Figure 2(d) arises because
changing the number of PCS agents alters the task-queue
execution-time distribution and thus its mean.
Contention-Induced Waiting as the Cause of Degradation
We conduct detailed analysis on a subset of samples using
VTune. Figure 3 displays the distribution of hotspot func-
tions and thread time consumption. As shown in Figure 3(a),
the proportion of time spent on lock operations rises rapidly
as the WT count increases. Once the lock-wait time exceeds
the task execution time, system performance begins to de-
grade.
Figure 3(b) further shows that the critical point at
which busy waiting starts to increase sharply around the op-


--- Page 3 ---
(a)
(b)
Composition of inactive wait time
Proportion of hot functions
Figure 3: Hotspot function distribution and thread time consumption
in DES environment
timal WT count is insensitive to inactive wait times such as
inactive synchronization and preemption.
Although busy waiting time is key to the optimal WT
count, measuring it online is challenging[Jancauskas et al.,
2019].
We therefore use lightweight metrics to indirectly
reflect busy-waiting status, as shown in Fig 4. Figure 4(a)
shows that usr cpu peaks near the optimal WT count, where
CPU cycles are most efficiently used for parallel tasks.
Once the WT count exceeds the optimum, system cpu (Fig-
ure 4(b)) rises sharply, indicating a shift from effective com-
putation to OS scheduling and thread waiting. Since busy-
waiting threads still occupy physical cores, aggregate CPU
utilization does not accurately reflect the optimal WT count
(see Figure 4(c)). Figure 4(d) further shows that the con-
text switch rate reaches a local minimum near the optimum,
suggesting that an appropriate thread count reduces unneces-
sary scheduling switches. In contrast, cache miss rate (Fig-
ure 4(e)) and memory consumption (Figure 4(f)) affect DES
performance but not optimal WT selection.
Linear Interference Under Multicore Concurrency
Figure 5 records the task execution time and task scheduling
time for an individual working thread under varying num-
bers of active threads. The results show that as the number
of active threads increases, both the execution and schedul-
ing times for a single thread grow linearly. This indicates
that the performance degradation of individual threads in a
multithreaded environment can be approximated by a linear
model, which captures the aggregate pressure exerted by all
threads on a single thread’s runtime. The slope and intercept
of these linear functions depend on hardware characteristics
Figure 4: Variation of DES environment’s micro-architectural Met-
rics with WT count
Figure 5: Performance interference among multiple WTs
(e.g., core frequency, cache size) and workload intensity.
3
Methodology
Based on the empirical findings in Section 2, we propose Au-
toThread. AutoThread consists of two core components: a
PINO predictor and a dynamic tuner. This approach adopts a
two-stage optimization strategy of online prediction followed
by dynamic adjustment: during the online prediction stage, it
rapidly estimates the optimal initial thread count based on the
characteristics of the current workload; during the dynamic
adjustment stage, it performs fine-grained adaptive thread
tuning according to runtime feedback.
3.1
Model-Informed PINO Predictor
Performance Model.
In typical SiL-RL inference work-
flows, the simulator must process a large number of compu-
tation tasks generated by multiple agents within each simu-
lation step. We decompose the execution of a single simula-
tion cycle into three sequential phases: task execution, task
scheduling, and synchronization. WT reconfiguration is per-
formed at the granularity of simulation cycles, during which
the WT count remains fixed.
During the task execution phase, WTs process assigned
tasks in parallel. Since the system must wait for all threads
to finish before synchronization, the total execution time is


--- Page 4 ---
Initial 
Thread 
PINO 
Predictor
Application 
Metrics 
Hardware 
Metrics 
Thread Adjustment
Execution 
Time
CPU 
Utilization
Throughput
 Monitoring process 
 Monitoring 
process 
1
nt -
nt
1
nt +
...
Throughput-
driven Fine-
tuning
CPU-aware 
Periodic 
Adjustment
Preparation
Scheduling-Execution-Synchronization
Load-aware 
Fast 
Prediction
Physics Loss
Supervised Loss
Regularization Loss
FC
Hardware 
Features
Application 
Features
1a
1b
opt
k
Cross-
Attention
Encoder
Encoder
FC&SoftPlus
FC&SoftPlus
FC&SoftPlus
RBA Weight Adaptation
Forward
Backward
Q
K
V
Adaptive Dynamic Tuner
Physics-Informed Neural Operator Predictor
Figure 6: Overall workflow of AutoThread
determined by the slowest thread:
Texe(k) =
N
k

∗1
µe
where N is the total number of tasks within the current simu-
lation step; k is the number of WTs; and µe denotes the aver-
age service rate of tasks within the current simulation step.
Scheduling is inherently serial because the shared sched-
uler serves at most one WT at a time. We model the scheduler
as an M/M/1 server and WTs as customers in a finite-source
closed queueing system, where a WT requests scheduling
only after finishing its current task, yielding an effective ar-
rival rate λ = kµe. When the system is stable, steady-state
Continuous-Time Markov Chain (CTMC) analysis gives:
Tsch = N ∗(
k
µb(1 −P0) −
1
kµe
),P0 =
1
Pk
i=0
k!
(k−i)!( kµe
µb )
i
where µb denotes the scheduler service rate and Po is the
idle probability of the scheduler. When kµe exceeds µb, the
scheduler becomes the dominant bottleneck and the total time
is bounded by the scheduler capacity:
Texe(k) + Tsch(k) = N
µb
+ 1
µe
This captures the saturation regime under oversubscription.
The synchronization phase (e.g., global state update and
clock advance by the master thread) is treated as constant with
respect to k when focusing on WT selection.
Based on Section 2.2.3, resource contention causes perfor-
mance degradation that grows linearly with active WT count:
µb(k) =
1
a1k + tbase1
,
µe(k) =
1
a2k + tbase2
where a1 and a2 denote contention intensity coefficients for
scheduling and execution, respectively, and tbase1,
tbase2
represent baseline times under single-thread execution. These
parameters are determined by hardware platform and applica-
tion context.
Combining the above, the total execution time of a single
simulation cycle can be expressed as:
T (k) =
( N
k

∗
1
µe + N ∗

k
µb(1−P0) −
1
kµe

, if kµe ≤µb
N
µb +
1
µe , if kµe > µb.
(1)
The above equation shows that execution time is a piecewise-
continuous, non-smooth function of the WT count k. Numer-
ical analysis reveals that the optimal configuration occurs at
k∗≈µb/µe, indicating optimal performance when scheduler
service rate balances with task execution rate.
PINO Predictor.
While µe can be estimated online from
probe-collected execution times, directly measuring µb is dif-
ficult due to microsecond-scale sensitivity and measurement
overhead. We therefore introduce a Physics-Informed Neu-
ral Operator (PINO) to fuse the above model with historical
traces for fast online prediction.
We define a neural operator Gθ
:
a
→
k∗
=
Gθ (a), which maps system state parameters a to the op-
timal WT number k∗.
We construct the feature vec-
tor a = {N, µe, kobs, usr cpu, system cpu, V SZ, cswch}
from both application and hardware features. Although vir-
tual memory usage (VSZ) has limited impact on thread deci-
sions, excessive memory consumption may trigger resource
contention or even abnormal program termination; thus, it is
included as an input to enhance robustness.
As illustrated in Figure 6, PINO predictor employs a multi-
output head cross-attention architecture. Encoders separately
process application and hardware features, cross-attention
captures their deep interactions, and FC layers decode fused
features into optimal WT count k∗and contention coefficients
a1, b1. Physical loss:
Lphy = ∥T(N, k, µb, µe) −Tobs∥2 + α∥µb
µe
−k∗∥2
Supervised loss and Regularization term:
Lsup = ∥k∗−kobs∥2,
Lreg = γ∥θ∥2
where T represents the theoretical performance model (Equa-
tion 1), µb is derived from the contention model as µb =
a1k + b1, and Tobs and kobs denote the observed task queue
execution time and iteratively measured optimal WT num-
ber, respectively. The weight α normalizes contributions of
the two physical components. The overall training objective
is Lloss = Lphy + λLsup + Lreg. We incorporate Residual-
Based Attention (RBA) [Anagnostopoulos et al., 2024] to dy-
namically adjust λ between physical and supervised losses.
In out-of-distribution scenarios, RBA automatically increases
the physical-loss weight, strengthening reliance on the perfor-
mance model and improving prediction robustness.


--- Page 5 ---
3.2
Adaptive Dynamic Tuner
Based on the trained PINO predictor, we design an adaptive
dynamic tuner adopting a three-tier progressive adjustment
strategy. The tuner aims to establish a closed-loop control
process of prediction–execution–feedback–readjustment, so
as to mitigate adverse effects caused by prediction errors, sys-
tem noise, and measurement bias. The complete workflow is
presented in Algorithm 1.
Load-Aware Fast Prediction.
During each execution cy-
cle, the system automatically records the average service time
of the current task queue tcur using probe pointer and com-
putes the average processing time of the queue Tcur (lines
1-3). When a change in tcur exceeding a preset threshold is
detected, the tuner immediately invokes PINO to predict the
optimal WT count and update it (lines 4–6). This mechanism
ensures fast responsiveness to sudden load changes.
CPU-Aware Periodic Adjustment.
To avoid continuous
prediction overhead and handle gradually varying loads, a
periodic checking mechanism is introduced. The check in-
terval is dynamically adaptive: if prediction was triggered in
the previous cycle, a short interval C1 is used to verify and
correct predictions quickly; otherwise, a longer interval C2 is
adopted to reduce monitoring overhead (line 7). At a check-
point, if the observed system cpu exceeds the usr cpu, the
algorithm proactively reduces the number of WTs to mitigate
contention (lines 8–16). This mechanism effectively maps
CPU indicators of resource contention into direct signals for
thread adjustment, thereby preventing performance degrada-
tion due to oversubscription.
Throughput-Driven Fine-tuning.
When the system is de-
tected to be in a high-contention state, the tuner switches to a
fine-tuning phase. In this phase, throughput of the task queue
is directly optimized as the adjustment objective. If reducing
threads leads to improved throughput, the adjustment is ac-
cepted and further attempts are made; otherwise, the change
is rolled back and the phase is terminated (lines 17–25). Con-
sidering that undersubscription has a less detrimental effect
on performance than the severe contention caused by over-
subscription, the fine-tuning phase only considers reducing
threads. Moreover, to avoid erroneous adjustments due to
random fluctuations or transient anomalies, the tuner exits
this phase only if throughput fails to improve over three con-
secutive simulation steps or if the thread count reaches the
minimum allowed value (line 20).
4
Evaluation
In this section, we first introduce the experimental setup and
current thread tuning methods. Subsequently, we evaluate the
proposed method against these baselines in terms of system
acceleration performance and adaptability. Finally, we con-
duct ablation studies to quantify the contributions of each op-
timization module and verify the robustness of our method
with respect to various hyperparameters.
4.1
Setup
The training set is derived from averaged statistics over the
entire execution under constant-load scenarios, where the
Algorithm 1 Three-Level Progressive Thread Adjustment
Input: δ (load change threshold), C1 (short period), C2
(long period)
Output: WT count k for each simulation step
1: while simulation not finished do
2:
tcur ←PROBETASKTIME()
3:
Tcur ←EXECUTECYCLE()
4:
if |tcur −tprev|/(tprev + ϵ) > δ and tuning = 0 then
5:
k ←PINO-PREDICT
6:
predicted ←TRUE
7:
else if predicted and (tick mod C1 = 0) then
8:
(system cpu, usr cpu) ←GETCPUMETRICS()
9:
if usr cpu < system cpu then
10:
k ←k −1, tuning ←1
11:
end if
12:
predicted ←FALSE
13:
else if ¬predicted and (tick mod C2 = 0) then
14:
if usr cpu < usr cpu then
15:
k ←k −1, tuning ←1
16:
end if
17:
else if tuning ≥1 and k > kmin then
18:
if Tcur < Tprev then
▷Throughput improved
19:
k ←k −1, tuning ←1
20:
else if tuning < 3 then
▷Tolerate fluctuation
21:
tuning ←tuning + 1
22:
else
▷Rollback and exit tuning
23:
k ←k + 1, tuning ←0
24:
end if
25:
end if
26:
tprev ←tcur, Tprev ←Tcur
27:
SYNCHRONIZE(); NEXTTICK()
28: end while
execution time of each task remains unchanged through-
out the simulation horizon. We split the dataset into train-
ing/testing/validation sets with a ratio of 0.7/0.2/0.1 to offline
train different predictors. During training, each feature vec-
tor is taken as the average over the whole execution; since the
load is constant, the optimal thread count label for each sam-
ple can be obtained by sweeping different thread counts and
recording the total execution time.
In the testing phase, we use dynamic workloads to evalu-
ate the speedup and adaptivity of each method. Specifically,
within each simulation step, task execution times follow a
Poisson distribution parameterized by t, while the parame-
ter t varies across steps as a square wave with frequency roh
(switching among [t, 1.5t, 2t]). Each method adjusts based
on instantaneous values of the feature variables at a single
time point, so as to emulate a practical deployment setting
with offline training and online testing.
Experiments are conducted on two multicore architectures:
AMD EPYC 9734 (112 Cores/224 Threads) and Intel Xeon
Gold 6338 (32 Cores/64 Threads).
The baselines include
ADAPT-T[Costa et al., 2019] based on runtime feedback
control; Otter[Luan et al., 2022] employing search strategies;
Thread Reinforcer[Pusukuri et al., 2011] utilizing system
resource utilization; Xgboost[Akash et al., 2021] as an ad-
vanced representative of machine learning-based prediction.


--- Page 6 ---
Figure 7: Runtime comparison of different methods on AMD plat-
form for UAV
extrapolate 
failed
convergence 
failed
Figure 8: Adaptiveness comparison on PCS and UAV
Additionally, a fixed thread count configuration was used as
a control experiment, denoted as Static. All methods were
implemented on the Repast HPC system[Zhu et al., 2017].
Each test case was executed at least five times to obtain opti-
mal measurement data.
4.2
Performance Experiments
We run the UAV benchmark on the AMD platform with the
execution horizon set to 5000 and the load threshold δ = 0.3,
and record the total runtime from end to-end under different
thread adjustment schemes; the results are shown in Fig. 7.
Compared to ADAPT-T, AutoThread saves up to 83.8% of
runtime in different scenarios. Over 20 test scenarios, Au-
toThread achieves an average runtime of 149.32 s and de-
livers 10.3% and 17.2% higher speedup than the state-of-
the-art Otter and Reinforcer, respectively. Notably, we set
the thread count of the fixed strategy to 20, i.e., the aver-
Figure 9: Results of ablation experiments
age output of all tuning schemes. Even when accounting for
the additional overhead introduced by frequent thread adjust-
ments, AutoThread still attains, on average, an 18.4% higher
speedup than the fixed strategy with prior knowledge, with a
maximum performance improvement of 62.6%.
4.3
Adaptiveness Experiments
We run the PCS and UAV applications on both Intel and
AMD platforms under different load-variation intensities
(frequency roh, amplitude t) , and record the system through-
put over environment steps to evaluate the adaptability of
different schemes, where throughput denotes the number of
tasks processed per millisecond.
Figure 8 shows that, in
practical scenarios, when competing methods successively
exhibit non-convergent oscillations and extrapolation fail-
ures, AutoThread still maintains strong parallel speedup. On
the PCS case, AutoThread attains an average throughput of
536.83, improving over ADTPT-T and Xgboost by 37.7%
and 2.3%, respectively, while remaining below Reinforcer’s
718.55. Under the UAV case with larger workload fluctua-
tions, AutoThread’s average throughput is 1.8× and 1.7× that
of Reinforcer and Xgboost, respectively.
4.4
Ablation Experiments
We ablate the PINO predictor and the Adaptive Dynamic
Tuner to investigate the performance contribution of each
component.
The compared variants include:
using only
the physics-informed neural operator network prediction
(PINO); using the dynamic tuner with the maximum thread
count (Dyn); applying the Dyn tuner on top of the Xgboost
output (Xgboost+Dyn); and pairing the ADAPT-T tuner with
the output of PINO (ADAPT+PINO). Figure 9 reports the
average throughput of different schemes when running the
UAV application on the ADM platform. The results show that
both the PINO predictor and the Adaptive Dynamic Tuner ef-
fectively improve runtime performance. Across 10 test sce-
narios, the Dyn technique increases the task processing speed
of Xgboost by 87.8% on average, with a maximum improve-
ment of 55.2×. PINO increases the task processing speed
of the ADAPT-T tuner by 3.9× on average. Moreover, Au-
toThread improves average throughput by 1.3× and 2.0× over
Xgboost+Dyn and ADAPT+PINO, respectively, demonstrat-
ing the combined benefits of the two techniques.


--- Page 7 ---
Figure 10: Robustness analysis of δ and C1/C2 parameter
4.5
Robustness Experiment
We further examine the impact of parameters δ, C1 and C2
on AutoThread’s performance. The parameter δ represents
the maximum tolerable degree of workload change for thread
adjustment. An overly small value leads to frequent thread
changes due to random hardware jitter, whereas an overly
large value prevents timely adaptation to workload changes.
AutoThread’s robustness to δ is shown in Figure 10. Bene-
fiting from the theoretical constraints of the physical model
and the error-correction capability of the dynamic tuner, Au-
toThread provides stable speedup even under workload inputs
with substantial randomness. In contrast, an excessively large
δ weakens the predictor’s sensitivity to workload changes, re-
sulting in performance degradation.
Figure 10 shows the impact of different C1/C2 combina-
tions on system performance. We find that a smaller C1 en-
ables faster response; however, an overly small C2 causes fre-
quent periodic checks and increases system overhead, while
an overly large C2 may cause the system to miss critical tun-
ing opportunities. The optimal ratio is approximately 2–4,
within which short-cycle validation and long-cycle monitor-
ing achieve a good balance—responding quickly to workload
changes while avoiding excessive monitoring overhead.
4.6
Discussion
The experimental results clearly demonstrate the advantages
of AutoThread in sustaining parallel speedup and substan-
tially reducing execution time, particularly in environments
with fluctuating workloads. The key strength of AutoThread
lies in the deep integration of data-driven representational
capacity with the structural constraints imposed by physical
models: on the one hand, it learns latent prior patterns from
runtime data to enable rapid prediction under dynamic work-
loads; on the other hand, by introducing interpretable theoret-
ical models as inductive biases and training constraints, it an-
chors the prediction process in consistent mechanistic logic,
thereby significantly improving robustness and the achievable
performance upper bound while preserving interpretability
and transferability. This form of mechanism-guided learn-
ing coupled with data-corrected inference is central to Au-
toThread’s superior effectiveness.
Specifically, first, guided by a performance model, PINO
enforces queueing-theoretic constraints on the neural net-
work’s predictive outputs, endowing the predictions with
strong generalization and physical plausibility; consequently,
it can provide reliable initial estimates of thread counts even
under workload conditions whose distributions differ from
those seen during training.
Second, the dynamic tuning
mechanism employs a three-level strategy to perform online
corrections to the predicted results, while accounting for the
overhead of monitoring and adjustment. This enables the sys-
tem to rapidly converge to a near-optimal thread configuration
when the workload changes, thereby accelerating the simula-
tion environment’s runtime efficiency.
5
Related Work
Many WT tuning methods have been proposed across do-
mains; however, compared with this study, they insufficiently
address dynamic workload fluctuations or generalizability.
Static modeling methods set fixed thread counts through em-
pirical heuristics or offline analysis, such as using a multiple
of physical cores[Montesano et al., 2024] or estimating opti-
mum from the ratio of thread creation to maintenance over-
head [Luo et al., 2025]. Although simple and efficient, these
strategies struggle in complex, volatile environments because
they cannot adjust to workload fluctuations in real time.
Machine
learning
has
enabled
data-driven
thread-
configuration
prediction,
including
Reinforcement
Learning[Xu et al., 2012], Ensemble Learning [Chao et
al., 2025], and online search optimization[Stetsenko and
Dyfuchyna, 2019], with applications in large-scale cluster
management. However, these methods often rely on high-
quality training data; under dynamic scenarios absent from
training, pure data-driven models may generalize poorly.
Another common category uses adaptive regulation based on
online feedback control [Albalawi, 2025]. These methods
incrementally adjust WT count, one thread at a time, using
metrics such as request arrival rates and service times
until performance no longer improves. Although practical
for cloud services, such feedback-driven regulation often
suffers from slow convergence, latency, and performance
oscillations in large thread spaces or under frequent workload
variations [Bahadur et al., 2025].
6
Conclusion
This paper proposes AutoThread, a thread-count tuning
method for ABS systems to accelerate RL inference. The
core contributions are as follows: (1) we open-source a mul-
tithreaded trajectory dataset collected from a DES simula-
tion environment, and empirically derive three key insights;
(2) we design a PINO-based thread predictor and establish
a theoretical model relating the number of WTs to runtime,
which is used to constrain and guide model training; and
(3) we develop an efficient hybrid thread adjustment method
that incorporates a load-aware adaptive tuning strategy on top
of PINO’s predictions. Experimental results show that Au-
toThread delivers excellent parallel speedup and strong work-
load adaptivity. The proposed approach is portable and can be
applied to accelerate other systems based on a shared event
queue. Future work will explore batch-sample thread tuning
methods for accelerating RL training.


--- Page 8 ---
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous IJCAI reviewers for their insightful
comments. This work was partially supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant
No.62503491.
Contribution Statement
Jiming Su and Hantao Hua contributed equally to this work.
Feng Zhu is the corresponding author.
References
[Akash et al., 2021] Lakindu Akash, Duneesha Fernando,
Malith Jayasinghe, Chamath Keppitiyagama, and Kishan-
than Thangarajah.
Machine learning based thread pool
tuning via program analysis.
In 2021 IEEE 23rd Int
Conf on High Performance Computing & Communica-
tions; 7th Int Conf on Data Science & Systems; 19th
Int Conf on Smart City; 7th Int Conf on Dependabil-
ity in Sensor, Cloud & Big Data Systems & Applica-
tion (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), pages 648–653.
IEEE, 2021.
[Albalawi, 2025] Nasser S Albalawi.
Dynamic schedul-
ing strategies for cloud-based load balancing in parallel
and distributed systems.
Journal of Cloud Computing,
14(1):33, 2025.
[Anagnostopoulos et al., 2024] Sokratis
J
Anagnostopou-
los, Juan Diego Toscano, Nikolaos Stergiopulos, and
George Em Karniadakis.
Residual-based attention in
physics-informed neural networks. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 421:116805, 2024.
[Bahadur et al., 2025] Faisal Bahadur, Zulfiqar Ahmad, and
Abdulmohsen Algarni. Poolrunner: An extensible perfor-
mance testing simulation tool for thread-pool middleware.
IEEE Access, 2025.
[Belsare et al., 2022] Sahil Belsare, Emily Diaz Badilla, and
Mohammad Dehghanimohammadabadi.
Reinforcement
learning with discrete event simulation: the premise, re-
ality, and promise. In 2022 Winter Simulation Conference
(WSC), pages 2724–2735. IEEE, 2022.
[Carothers et al., 2002] Christopher
D
Carothers,
David
Bauer, and Shawn Pearce.
Ross: A high-performance,
low-memory, modular time warp system. Journal of par-
allel and distributed computing, 62(11):1648–1669, 2002.
[Chao et al., 2025] Zhiteng Chao, Feng Gu, Junying Huang,
Wenjie Li, Jing Ye, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. Memory-
efficient and adaptive heterogeneous framework for gate-
level fault simulation. ACM Transactions on Design Au-
tomation of Electronic Systems, 30(5):1–27, 2025.
[Costa et al., 2019] Nilushan
Costa,
Malith
Jayasinghe,
Ajantha Atukorale, Supun Abeysinghe, Srinath Perera,
and Isuru Perera. Adapt-t: An adaptive algorithm for auto-
tuning worker thread pool size in application servers. In
2019 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communica-
tions (ISCC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[Eldeeb and Alves, 2025] Eslam Eldeeb and Hirley Alves.
Offline and distributional reinforcement learning for wire-
less communications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03804,
2025.
[Feriani and Hossain, 2021] Amal Feriani and Ekram Hos-
sain. Single and multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
for ai-enabled wireless networks: A tutorial. IEEE Com-
munications Surveys & Tutorials, 23(2):1226–1252, 2021.
[FlightAware, 2025] FlightAware.
Flightaware - flight
tracker / flight status. https://uk.flightaware.com/, 2025.
Accessed: 2025-10-25.
[Hu et al., 2024] Kai Hu, Mingyang Li, Zhiqiang Song, Keer
Xu, Qingfeng Xia, Ning Sun, Peng Zhou, and Min Xia. A
review of research on reinforcement learning algorithms
for multi-agents. Neurocomputing, 599:128068, 2024.
[Jancauskas et al., 2019] Vytautas Jancauskas, Tomasz Pi-
ontek, Piotr Kopta, and Bartosz Bosak.
Predicting
queue wait time probabilities for multi-scale comput-
ing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,
377(2142):20180151, 2019.
[Li et al., 2025] Cuixia Li, Junhai Wang, Jiahao Shi, Liqiang
Liu, and Shuyan Zhang. Adwtune: an adaptive dynamic
workload tuning system with deep reinforcement learning.
Complex & Intelligent Systems, 11(4):192, 2025.
[Lin et al., 2025] Haoran Lin, Xianzhi Yu, Kang Zhao, Han
Bao, Zongyuan Zhan, Ting Hu, Wulong Liu, Zekun Yin,
Xin Li, and Weiguo Liu. Hap: Hybrid adaptive parallelism
for efficient mixture-of-experts inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.19373, 2025.
[Luan et al., 2022] Guangqiang Luan, Pu Pang, Quan Chen,
Shuai Xue, Zhuo Song, and Minyi Guo. Online thread
auto-tuning for performance improvement and resource
saving.
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, 33(12):3746–3759, 2022.
[Luo et al., 2025] Xiaoxuan Luo, Weiwei Lin, Jiachun Li,
Fan Chen, Haocheng Zhong, and Keqin Li. An extensi-
ble thread throttling method for multiple openmp parallel
programs. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst., September
2025.
[Montesano et al., 2024] Federica
Montesano,
Romolo
Marotta,
and Francesco Quaglia.
Spatial/temporal
locality-based load-sharing in speculative discrete event
simulation on multi-core machines. ACM Transactions on
Modeling and Computer Simulation, 35(1):1–31, 2024.
[Morgado et al., 2025] ˆAngelo Morgado, Kaoru Ota, Mi-
anxiong Dong, and Nuno Pombo.
Evaluating end-to-
end autonomous driving architectures: a proximal policy
optimization approach in simulated environments.
Au-
tonomous Intelligent Systems, 5(1):14, 2025.
[Pusukuri et al., 2011] Kishore
Kumar
Pusukuri,
Rajiv
Gupta, and Laxmi N Bhuyan.
Thread reinforcer: Dy-
namically determining number of threads via os level
monitoring. In 2011 IEEE International Symposium on
Workload Characterization (IISWC), pages 116–125.
IEEE, 2011.


--- Page 9 ---
[Riboldi et al., 2025] Carlo ED Riboldi, Marco Tomasoni,
et al. Formation flight of fixed-wing uavs: Dynamic mod-
eling, guidance design, and testing in realistic scenarios.
Aerospace, 12(3):1–49, 2025.
[Risco-Mart´ın et al., 2022] Jos´e
L
Risco-Mart´ın,
Kevin
Henares, Saurabh Mittal, Luis F Almendras, and Katzalin
Olcoz. A unified cloud-enabled discrete event parallel and
distributed simulation architecture. Simulation Modelling
Practice and Theory, 118:102539, 2022.
[Samadi et al., 2024] Mohammad Samadi, Sara Royuela,
Luis Miguel Pinho,
Tiago Carvalho,
and Eduardo
Qui˜nones.
Time-predictable task-to-thread mapping in
multi-core processors.
Journal of Systems Architecture,
148:103068, 2024.
[Stetsenko and Dyfuchyna, 2019] Inna
V
Stetsenko
and
Oleksandra Dyfuchyna. Thread pool parameters tuning us-
ing simulation. In International Conference on Computer
Science, Engineering and Education Applications, pages
78–89. Springer, 2019.
[Wu et al., 2022] Zhibin Wu, Qinyue Zhou, Yucheng Dong,
Jiuping Xu, Abdulrahman H Altalhi, and Francisco Her-
rera. Mixed opinion dynamics based on degroot model
and hegselmann–krause model in social networks. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems,
53(1):296–308, 2022.
[Xu et al., 2012] Cheng-Zhong Xu, Jia Rao, and Xiangping
Bu. Url: A unified reinforcement learning approach for
autonomic cloud management.
Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, 72(2):95–105, 2012.
[Zhang et al., 2021] Chi Zhang, Sanmukh Rao Kuppanna-
gari, and Viktor K Prasanna. Parallel actors and learners:
A framework for generating scalable rl implementations.
In 2021 IEEE 28th International Conference on High Per-
formance Computing, Data, and Analytics (HiPC), pages
1–10. IEEE, 2021.
[Zhu et al., 2017] Feng Zhu, Yiping Yao, Wenjie Tang, and
Jun Tang. A hierarchical composite framework of paral-
lel discrete event simulation for modelling complex adap-
tive systems. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory,
77:141–156, 2017.
